Progress notes for my School of Code Bootcamp 13 learning. #100DaysofCode

Day 1: Computational thinking and an introduction to pair programming

Day 2: Computational thinking in practice - applying the concept to word games through pair progamming. Then, consolidation of cloning, pulling, and pushing via github.

Day 3: Variables and functions. We looked at translating Scratch blocks into JavaScript code, and then put together a simple password authentication function in pair programming using 'while' and 'if/else'.

Day 4: Had a mindset seminar about how, when, and why seeking feedback helps growth, both professionally and personally. Discussed the best ways of both receiving and giving feedback. Then moved onto objects and arrays. We looked at what they are, how we do things with them (like select, change, and add items). I also looked into how to remove items using the pop and splice methods. 

Day 5: Hackathon 1. Created a simple rock paper scissors game, using player's name (10 character limit, and used REGEX to ensure it begins with upper case letter) and input (rock, paper, or scissors) to play against randomised moves from the computer player. The game kept a running total of losses, wins, and ties, which it displayed as alerts. Player input was pulled from prompt. 

Day 6: Introduction to codewars. Introduction to the document object model, and how to manipulate it using JS. We ran through a couple of workshops where we changed, added, and removed elements, and properties of elements. For example, appending a number-doubling button to a webpage, allowing users to change the webpage h1 using an HTML form, and selecting and changing style elements. 

Day 7: Introduction to event listeners, and how to use them. We did some pair exercises, and then moved onto changing codee from the rock paper scissors exercises so that instead of taking input from prompts, and displaying results in the console and via alerts, all this was done through interacting with the webpage itself. 

Day 8: Introduction to asynchronous code. We used setInterval, clearInterval, and event listeners to build automatic counters you can stop by interacting with the browser. We built a simple clock, where the minute second and hour hands ticked by with the seconds like an analogue clock. We learned about the call stack and event loop. We created an asynch function to call Kanye West tweets from an API, and display these in a pre-fab browser template as a list. 

Day 9: We started with a mindset session looking at the importance of cognitive diversity in teams and problem-solving. We looked into what our Myers-Briggs personality types help us bring to a team, and where we might face conflict and challenges. Then we practiced navigating structured data, and extracting information so we could use it - in this case, printing it to the browser and console. Then we spent time researching further topics - in our group, we looked at Chrome dev tools we haven't touched upon yet during the bootcamp. I looked at the uses of recorder, the performance tab, and the subsequent performance insights panel.  

Day 10: Hackathon 2. We used a trivia question API to build a trivia quiz page. It pulled 50 true/false questions, and players cycle through them one by one. Each question must be answered, with navigation buttons to move between them and a score counter to keep track of wins. I polished this up over the weekend, and am in theprocess of adding extra features like CSS and 'help'. 

Day 11: Began the day working independently on coding, then in pairs on codewars. Then had a series of introductions to the agile work method (including importance of MVP and early feedback - the 'shift left'), and UX/UI. We also spent time working on an elevator pitch for our personal career trajectories, reflecting on how our unusual entries to the field work in our favour. We blind-coded a replica of Google's homepage, and wrapped up with an intro to Frontend Master. 

Day 12: Looked at design thinking in closer detail. For this, we came up with an idea for a new bootcamp, and worked on the first three steps of the design thinking process: empathise, define, and ideate. 

Day 13: Employer/career talk from Javaid and Alex at Nester, looking at the value of a good portfolio and what to expect in our first tech jobs. We then put together a wireframe for our bootcamp application process, and looked into design theory areas like colour theory, balance, user flow, and hierarchy of attention. Then we studied CSS stule specificity, and how the cascade part of the CSS will affect which style is ultimately used when there’s conflict. 

Day 14: Mindset talk about identifying our listening styles and being attentive to how we work with others. Plus, a look at how developing alter egos can help cultivate traits and habits we aspire to - e.g., confident public speaking. We also heard from Paavan Buddhdev from AND Digital, who walked us through key UI/UX concepts like: don't make the user think, inject wonder into the product, and design it according to what the user expects. We also looked at using > in CSS selections to avoid the overuse of classes, and the value of building responsive design into a page from the beginning. In our research teams, we ran an accessibility audit for Hotwire holiday booking website, looking at its use of space and balance, blocks of text, colour schemes, and how navigable it would be for users with reduced mobility. 

Day 15: hackathon 3. We refined and polished the user personas, user stories, and ideas that we'd come up with for our bootcamp. We took our low fidelity wireframe and improved upon it, then embellished this and turned it into a high fidelity mockup on figma. 

Day 16: Introduction to NodeJS. We started following up on last week's recap task - using the design process to mock up a personal portfolio page. Then we got an overview of what NodeJS is and how it works. We made a simple module that produces a greeting using three different variables from a separate document. Then we moved onto adding a second functinoality that picks a random user from the bootcamper list.  

Day 17: Instead of custome modules, today we looked at native modules .We used fs to read/write files in our user data app. Then we imported a third party package, express, to build a basic server. This server used UUID to assign a random ID to user objects, which we would then read and add to - e.g., adding a new user to our userData array. We also looked at how we can use destructuring to more efficiently pull out items from an imported array.

Day 18: We praticed using Postman to simulate simple requests of different types. We imported Nodemon as a dev dependency to make building our API easier. Then we did a deeper dive into APIs by building out functionality for a simple API - cwissy.API. FOr this, we coded route handlers.

Day 19: Mindset talk on the importance of listening to your inner champion, and co-operating with your inner critic. Then we moved onto the role of middleware, and imported Morgan to add logs to all incoming requests in our API backend. Then we looked at how to put together the HTML, JS, and CSS files that constitute the front end, and serve these static files when the URL is pasted into the browser. Finally, we separated out our backend logic into different locations (models and routes) to separate concerns, make the code more readable, and easier to work with and edit. 

Day 20: Hackathon 4. We put together a backend for a new API that allowed users to create, read, update, and delete data from a list of recipes stored in recipes.json file in our IDE. 

Day 21: Recap task from the weekend - repeating the hackathon tickets but for a new data file that contained user information. So, creating helper functions, route handlers, and testing them (for me using curl commands). Then we had a career talk from Stuart Langridge about things to watch out for as a new dev (companies asking for work in exchange for exposure, copmanies looking for extensive overtime without fair compensation), and the importance of playing around with interesting code on personal projects. Then, introduction to databases. We are learning the basics of PostgreSQL, and spent the afternoon looking over how tables are set up and how to carry out CRUD style requests on them. We learned basic PostgreSQL query syntax and how to generate automatic integer as identity: INT GENERATED ALWAYS AS IDENTITY PRIMARY KEY. 

Day 22: We looked at inner, outer, left, and right joins. Left and inner being the most common, and right and outer rare. We did exercises combining more complex queries pg exercises, looking at linking up tables, concatenating columns into single columns, creating columns to display calculations using data from other columns, etc. Looked at using conditional statements with CASE, and limiting results with SELECT count(n) FROM  <table>. Completed SQL murder mystery task navigating databases to solve crime. 
 
Day 23: Codewars to begin. Then learned about how we can use databases to store our data somehwere where it PERSISTS - as opposed to in a local .json file. We looked into railway, and then Elephant SQL. environment variables and how to set them up in .env, tweaking references in other files accordingly.
Learned about node-postgres (PG) and its function as a kind of ‘translator’ between the node.js and SQL server/clients. Query, which we get from pg, is imported to allow us to insert SQL queries directly into node.js as strings, and send them (via a key saved as a URL in .env) to our SQL database to return us data. Pool allows us to more rapidly handle connection security.Learned about SQL injections, and how we can shore our app up against them by sanitising our queries: using prepared statements and parameterised queries. We practised using them in our API SQL queries.

Day 24: Mindset talk from Joseph about different methods of group decision making - roman voting, testing the room, etc. We looked at how personal values can manifest in group work, and the positive and negative effects our own values could have on our teams. I had a good progress meeting with my SoC mentors. 
  
Day 25: Hackathon 5. Building an API using Express, Morgan, pg. and ElephantSQL that interacts with a database using SQL queries, as opposed to last week's use of a recipes.json file. We built a simple art catalogie database that users could use to look up and add different artifacts. 

  
  Day 26: Recap task: taking the CSJ modules in our previous workshops and hackathons and converting them to ESM, by changing the way files are imported, exported, and referenced within the app. Then, industry talk from Nadeem at Talis, focusing on the importance of testing and coding with testing in mind. Introduction to automated testing, Jest, and unit testing. Unit tests should be many and small: reliable, quick, and testing isolated portions of code. We looked at simple Jest test syntax and wrote simple tests of our own.
  
  Day 27: We looked at the red green refactor approach in TDD (test driven development): make a test that assesses a small component of what you want to do; write code that fails it; write JUST enough code that it passes the test, and then refactor afterwards without making the code fail the test. Paul Jaffré came in from Cypress to talk through end-to-end (e2e) testing. It’s one way of identifying something to test: instead of focusing on one unit, or the integration of different units, you focus on one user flow. e.g., logging in. Paul gave us a Cypress walkthrough, then we began cypress workshop on writing tests to check functionality of simple list app: how to simulate elements clicked and data inputted by user, and then check with assertions. As homework, looked at the difference between spread and rest operators and ways to free up disk space. Learned that I can delete .deb and .exe files after installation is completed. Learned that the chromebook sliding disk-space option in settings is as easy as it looks to use - just make sure the space you allocate to Linux doesn’t exceed the available space on the computer.
  
  Day 28: Started with some codewars - looked at using for(let X of str) as an alternative way of iterating over a string. I prefer it - more concise! We continued work on cypress workshop - did not get far, but learned how to use data-cy=”X” tagging in html so we could more accurately and reliably target elements we wanted to include int he test simulation. Chained commands together like .get and .click., and looked more closely at the pros and cons of using this as a complement to other kinds of testing: it’s more time consuming to execute and build, but can help test core functionality better than other methods. Then we looked at the third kind of testing in the pyramid: integrated testing. Specifically: API testing using SuperTest. We built tests for async functions that were making get requests to a specific API URL from our VS Code app. We can do this instead of using postman, or in my case curl commands.
  
  
